# Film Metamorphosis: from silent to ....?

## Abstract

Our research aim 
Since the inception of cinema in the late nineteenth century, movies have undergone a remarkable metamorphosis, evolving from silent, black-and-white motion pictures to the vibrant, immersive and captivating films of today. 

Technological advancements have played an essential role in shaping the cinematic landscape. The transition from silent films to the sound and color film revolutionized the aesthetics of these compositions. The introduction of digital technology further transformed the industry through super-realistic special effects and computer-generated imagery(CGI).

In the present era, the ease of movie consumption has reached unprecented heights thanks to digital platforms and streaming services. While this accessibility has undeniably expanded the quantity of available content, there is an unhindered countereffect such a potential trade-off in quality. The increased pressure on filmmakers to produce mass appeal and palatable content may have a negative impact on artistic standards.



## Research questions
This project aims to investigate on the above stated topic. With this goal in mind, some questions have been proposed to help us understand how movies have changed through time. The following interrogations will be answered during the project:

- Did the complexity of movie dialogues decrease over time? Can we find a correlation between the increase in smartphone usage and the decrease in attention span? 
- Is it true that movies have become more similar in recent years? 
- Which movie characteristic makes it age more slowly and stay popular for longer?
- How did the average emotional arc of movies change over time? 
- How did the impact of each feature on revenue change over time? which feature became more or less relevant through the years? 


## Additional datasets

#### Dataset imdb ratings over time 

In order to understand how the ratings of certain movies has evolved over time, we used an the API provided by [WaybackMachine](https://archive.org/help/wayback_api.php) to get a snapshot of the [IMBD.com](https://www.imdb.com/) page of each movie one year and five years after the release. In this way we were able to obtain the rating and the number of people who voted, while associating them with the IMBD identifier provided in the [IMDB database](https://datasets.imdbws.com/title.basics.tsv.gz) and with the original dataset through the name of the movie.

<!-- imdb_ratings -->

## Methods

### Evolution movie plots and plot similarity
#### Plot preprocessing
First we filter out all movies with plots with less than 200 words. Then we use the NLTK library to tokenize the plots, filter out stopwords, lowercasing, stemming (reducing words to their root form). We also filter out people's names, as two movies where the main characters have the same name are not necesserily similar. We then use the Bag-Of-Words model to represent the plots. We then use the open source gensim library to perform Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) with the bag of words vectors of each plot. We then pick a certain amount of topics. The LDA then gives us the topics as a distribution over words, and for each movie plot how it is distributed over the topics. We can easily interpret the topics by looking at the most frequent words in it. 

#### Evolution movie plots

To see how movie plots evolved over time, we use three approaches: 
- **First approach**: We start by doing a tf-idf transformation on the Bag Of Words vectors to get a better representation. As the resulting vectors are still very high dimensional, we use PCA to reduce the dimensionality. We then perform k-means clustering to get a certain amount of clusters over the movie plots. We can interpret each cluster by taking a sample of the movies in them. Then for each time period (e.g. decade), we look how the movies in that time period are distributed over the clusters to get a sense of the type of movie plots in that time period. In this way we can see which types of movies were popular when and try to link this to external events. 
- **Second approach**: We use the topic based representation generated by LDA. We can then again perform k-means clustering using this representation, interpreting each cluster by its centroid (e.g. a centroid could be: 40% war, 20% money, 40% other topics). We can then again see for each time period, how the movies were distributed over the clusters (optionally weighting each movie by its box office revenue as a proxy for its popularity) to get a sense of which type of movies were popular when.
- **Third approach**: Here we do a sentence by sentence sentiment analysis of each plot, to get a representation for its emotional arc. For each year, we then compute an average of this emotional arc for all the plots in each year. We can then see how the average emotional arc of movies changed over time.

### Plot complexity

### Plot similarity
After text preprocesing, plot similarity can be computed in two ways:
- **Cosine distance**: The bag of words obtained is reduced to the first 100 words, avoiding long plots being more prone to be more similar to other plots due to its increased number of words. Then, the cosine distance between two plots can be computed fairly.A cosine distance of 1 would mean the two movies are identical, and a value of 0 would represent no similarity at all.
- **LDA and clustering**: Computing cosine distance with the frequency vectors lacks some complexity and fails to capture generalized topics. Using LDA algorithm, broaded topics can be extrapolated and more real similarity can be captured. Furthermore, it makes it easier for a clustering analysis by topic. In this way,  a movie which belongs to a big cluster and the closer it is to the center of the cluster, the less original is a movie.
 
### Movie aging
### Movie metadata preprocessing

Firstly we removed all the movies without movie_box_office_reveneue (attempts to find datasets with additional box_office_revenue weren’t successful). We then normalized the format of the date, while dropping the one which didn’t respect the %Y-%m-%d' format. 
We then merged the movie.metadata dataset with the imbd one (which contained imbd id for each movie). Finally, we extracted the features that were encoded in a dictionary (language, genre, country) and added them to the dataset with onehot encoding. 


For this part, we will use the [dataset imdb ratings over time](#Dataset-imdb-ratings-over-time). We took the difference between the ratings for one and five years after release. This shows which movie became more or less popular over time. Then we regressed the metadata of the movies on the difference in ratings (positive if the ratings increased and negative if they decreased over the years) to determine which features have greater influence on the popularity of a movie over time. 

### Most influential feature for revenue over time

Finally, to answer the question of which features had a higher influence on the revenue through the years we grouped the movies in 10 years groups (e.g. from 1920 to 1930 etc.). Then we regressed over the revenue in each of these groups and sorted the coefficient to understand which were the more relevant features in each year group. 

## Timeline and organization

### Executed timeline

Steps ...: **Deadline Milestone 2 17.11.2022**

*01.12.2022: Deadline Homework 2*

Step ...: **Deadline Milestone 3 23.12.2022**

### Organization within team

<table class="tg" style="table-layout: fixed; width: 342px">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 16px">
<col style="width: 180px">
</colgroup>
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th class="tg-0lax">Teammate</th>
    <th class="tg-0lax">Contributions</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Oriol </td>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Plot similarity</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Stefano V </td>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Movie aging</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Stefano C</td>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Plot complexity</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Max</td>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Sentiment analysis</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Michelle</td>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Exploratory Data Analysis</td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>
